Hello, and welcome to Space 5065, Space
Environment Interactions.
Here's my contact info. My name is Lynnann George,
and my office hours will generally be online
on the Zoom that I posted Monday and Wednesday, 2:00 to
4:00.
So I'd like to start off my lecture for the first day by
asking a few questions. What is space?
Where does it start?
Where does it end?
Does it matter?
And why are we concerned about the space environment?
So I'd like you to ponder those questions
couple of minutes, and let's see what you come up with.
What is space? It's everything outside of our
atmosphere around the Earth. That's how we define it as mere
earthlings. Where does it start? There's a lot
of debate over that. Some folks say it starts at the Kármán line, which is about
100 kilometers up.
But a satellite doesn't stay in space very long at 100
kilometers.
So there's some debate over that. We're going to
use, well, I'll talk about this a little later, but we're going to use about 200
kilometers
in
for our definition because that is where a satellite will
stay, at least for a few orbits.
Where does it end? I don't know if anyone knows the question to
that. Does it matter? Well, what we're going
to talk mostly about in this class is about
Earth-orbiting satellites, although that doesn't prevent us
from looking at the other planets in our solar system.
We're not going to go outside our solar system for this
class, and we're going to concentrate mostly on
Earth-orbiting satellites because that's what most of us here
on Earth are concerned about. And why are we concerned about
the space environment? Well, about one-quarter
of all spacecraft failures are traced
to the space environment.
So why do we study it? Well, it's very harsh,
and we're going to talk about the effects on satellites and humans
and what we can do to design satellites to survive in
that environment.
So the first part of this lecture is the space environment,
and then we're going to talk about Earth-Sun interactions.
So one of our
motivational aspects is that we have been to the moon.
1969 to 1972, we flew six
missions there. 12 men have walked on the moon,
starting with Apollo 11 in July of '69 and
ending with Apollo 17 in December of '72.
That was the last moon surface mission at least.
Now we have Artemis I and II, where we're going to go back to the
moon and possibly stay or go beyond,
and then Artemis III, which is scheduled for some time in late
2027.
So that describes a little bit the picture on the left.
The picture on the right is the Milky Way.
So what are we seeing? We're seeing a very small portion
of our solar system. We are on the Orion
Spur, not even an arm
of our Milky Way galaxy.
What we see when we're looking out is mostly either the
Perseus arm, which is the outer arm,
or the Sagittarius arm, which is the inner arm.
And we often say that the Army controls the
ground, the Navy controls the seas, the Air Force now controls the
skies up to the Kármán line.
But the Space Force is really involved in everything
outside of that, and that can be a huge responsibility.
So just how huge is our Milky Way galaxy?
It's a small part of a huge entity or our
whole universe. The Milky Way consists of about
100 billion stars, 43.2
billion years old, and
120,000 light years across.
So keep in mind a light year is about
6 trillion
miles or 9 trillion kilometers.
To put that into perspective, just to get to the
last planet in our solar system, Neptune, that's only
about 3 billion miles or 4.8 billion
kilometers.
Now, our Milky Way galaxy is part
of our local group that consists of about
50 known galaxies, the largest being ours and the
Andromeda Galaxy. Andromeda is roughly
twice the size of ours
and about 2.5 light years from our solar system.
Our local group is about 10 billion light years across.
So we're talking about huge distances that's kind of hard
to fathom as we sit here on Earth.
We're part of the Virgo Supercluster within the Laniakea
Supercluster, and beyond that is the universe, which
has millions, trillions, billions, millions
times trillions times billions of things out there
that we are interested in learning more about
So one thing I like to do is ponder what makes the Earth unique
and habitable.
So let's get this going.
Note, even at Geo, which is about three times out the
diameter of the Earth,
that's still relatively close. The sun is about 93 million miles
away,
and that's still relatively close in the big scheme of things.
So what are four factors, or I'll pick the top four,
that make Earth habitable?
First off, we have water in liquid form.
71% of the Earth's surface is covered by water, and that's good
for humans because we consist of about 60% water.
Second interesting fact is that it's close to our energy
source, the sun,
where we get warmth and heat.
Photosynthesis is allowed to happen based on the sun's energy,
and we're also in the sun's gravity well, which is good because it keeps us in
orbit.
We call this the Goldilock zone. We are in the Goldilock
zone of our solar system.
But anything good, like the sun, brings challenges.
Fortunately, the third aspect is that we have a magnetic
field that protects us from the sun and gives us
our atmosphere, makes sure we have an atmosphere.
But, like I said, anything good brings along challenges.
It traps charged particles and radiation, and our
magnetic field continuously moves and changes.
Number four is that we have a relatively fast
rotation. Mercury only rotates about one and a
half times, or two and a half times, I can't remember which,
per orbit, which means it gets really, really hot on one side
and really, really cold on the other.
Venus, on the other hand, has a
atmosphere that's high in carbon
dioxide and other harmful
elements,
and it is very hot. It's actually our
hottest planet in our solar system.
So the fact that the Earth is next and it rotates at a pretty fast
speed, relatively, 360 degrees per 24
hours or 15 degrees per hour, that keeps us from getting
too overheated or too cold at any one time.
So who am I? I'm a first-generation college student.
I got my PhD at Georgia Tech in robotics.
I started off with, of course, undergraduate and master's
degrees in mechanical engineering at Georgia Tech.
Served in the Air Force for about 10 years.
They selected me to go back and get my PhD, and
I did it on flex-body nuclear waste
robots,
which were supposed to clean up nuclear waste.
The problem is that they have very long arms, and
they're subject to vibrations. So I developed a
little mini robot, you can barely see it there on the
bottom of the long robot arm, that
provides the damping mechanisms for that.
Other things that I have done, I served in the Air Force for 20
years. I worked on the Titan IV program, which launched the
Cassini mission into space. I worked on that.
The Cassini mission went to Saturn and one of Saturn's
moons, Titan.
I launched a NRO satellite to space
in 1995. I worked at
Space Vehicles Directorate for a few years, three years.
I served in Afghanistan
to help start up their acquisition agency.
I taught for eight years at the Air Force Academy.
I did a summer program at Marshall Space Flight Center, looking
at interplanetary mission design trajectories for
a human mission to Mars, and others I'll talk about
throughout the course. I am also the author of
an online textbook. If you just look up Introduction to Orbital
Mechanics, Lynnanne George, that'll pop right up.
And I'm in the process of writing a second textbook targeted
for high school students about aerospace engineering.
So typically, if this was an in-person class, I
would ask you for these questions, but it's not,
so we'll skip over this.
But before I introduce the next slide, I wanted
to talk about Moon missions. So I thought
it would be interesting to look up what the Moon missions
were and to compare them against major
solar events over the
past 100 years or so.
So one thing you'll notice,
we had
several missions in 1972.
Apollo 16 launched in April of
'72. Apollo 17 launched
in December of '72. Now, if you compare this, and this
is available information you can get just off of Wikipedia, for
example.
It lists some of the major solar storms.
And what
caught my eye is that in August of
1972, there was a major
solar storm
Fastest coronal mass ejection transit time recorded, we'll talk
about what a CME is shortly. Extreme solar
particle events, and the most
hazardous to human spaceflight during the Space Age.
Look at how that compares to where we were in the Apollo
missions. It happened right in between those.
If it had happened when those men were up on
the Moon without any special radiation protection, that would've
been fatal. So it's important to understand our
space environment, we just got lucky in other
words, so that we can avoid putting our satellites,
spacecraft, and humans in jeopardy in the future.
So one thing I'd like to do is to talk about the history of
space a little bit, and one of them was Sputnik.
Launched on 4 October 1957, so I have a little video
here which I will share.
Okay, so let me share this.
A man-made celestial body, for the first time in history,
overcame terrestrial gravity and flew into space.
November 4th, 1957, the world's press
announces the miracle of the age. The Russians have successfully launched the
first satellite ever to circle the Earth.
Okay, so what are some of the things that we
learned from that mission? Well, when the Soviets launched it,
it created worldwide fear and sparked the Space Race.
It was simply a polished sphere
with four radio transmitters that broadcast radio pulses at
20 and 40 MHz
in the very high frequency, or VHF, range.
It reportedly opened people's garage doors when it went
overhead. There were reports of that because apparently garage
doors tended to operate off of 20 and 40 MHz
sometimes.
It was launched into a low elliptical orbit, and it took three
weeks till the batteries ran out, then it orbited two more
months before de-orbiting.
So, what was learned?
The main thing is,
oops,
satellites became crucially important
both strategically and politically.
I think that was the number one lesson learned, but what was learned about the
space environment? Well, the video kind of mentioned this.
We have the density of the atmosphere, or
drag,
that
didn't allow it to float up there indefinitely forever.
It eventually de-orbited after about three months
or about,
let's see,
two months,
and we're going to call this the neutral environment, although it's really anything
but neutral. It's very harsh and harmful,
but that's what we're going to study one week of this.
Second,
the propagation of radio signals was possible
through the ionosphere
And we'll study the different layers of the atmosphere in a
couple of lessons from now.
But the ionosphere is about
48 to
965 kilometers. Those of
you who like to work in miles, although we will typically work in SI
units in this class, that's about 30 to 600
miles.
And
the radio signals were able to transmit through that
atmosphere. So those are the two main things that were learned from that.
Second, I want to look at is
Sputnik 2, December 1957. This video is
just a little longer, but I think it's worth
viewing, and we'll answer the same few questions.
"I'm
Commander of Sputnik 2. Growing up on the streets of Moscow,
I could only look to the heavens and wonder.
To be the first in space is an accomplishment I never dreamed
about. I do this in the name of the motherland, in
the name of Comrade Lenin,
Comrade Khrushchev, in the name of the party,
and in the name of sausage.
I am Laika.
This isn't a happy story, but it's my story,
and there's little time to tell it.
From three dogs, Albina, Mushka, myself,
I was selected for this mission.
What set me apart?
My ability to withstand the centrifuge tests, my superior
aptitude to sit and eat and go to the bathroom in a
small cabin and even smaller spacesuit.
Also, Albina just had a litter of puppies.
But the mission was rushed.
After the glorious launch of Sputnik 1, Comrade
Khrushchev wanted another success to commemorate the 40th anniversary of our
triumphant Bolshevik revolution.
But that gave us only a month.
The temperature control system was hastily designed,
and there was no time for a recovery plan to bring me
home.
When Sputnik 1 launched, its signal was heard around the
world. On Sputnik 2,
the signal of my heartbeat is only heard by Soviet scientists.
During the launch, the telemetric sensor said my heart rate was three
times as fast. The G-forces caused my respiratory rate to
increase fivefold. Then my heart slow.
In zero gravity,
space,
my breathing is slower and deeper.
I am alive.
While I orbit the Earth, information of respiration, blood
pressure, heart rate, even my movements in the weightless
cabin are constantly transmitted back.
So I am alone, but I am not alone. My
comrades can hear me, and I orbit.
But this is a one-way mission.
By the second orbit, it's getting so hot.
There was clearly a miscalculation in thermodynamics.
The cooling fans are useless. I know my comrades tried.
I know they are there.
I orbit for a third time.
Through the small window, I can see Earth.
I'm not sure where the motherland is.
I am a dog after all.
It's my fourth orbit.
Maybe five hours since I entered space.
It's so hot.
I feel like I can't breathe.
The telemetric sensors have failed.
I look at Earth out the window."
Okay, so what was learned from that
mission? Well,
a month after the first Sputnik mission,
Laika, whose name stands for Barker,
was launched into space. She died on the fourth orbit due to overheating
caused by air conditioning malfunction, and they used
fans which need air and
other things like that in order to be able to work
properly.
Not mentioned in the video is that she also vomited, which
was our first indication of space adaptation
sickness, which we'll learn about next week.
So what was learned about the space environment? So a few things here.
Vomited, space adaptation syndrome,
and
died of overheating.
What was learned about the space environment?
First off, space is a vacuum or near vacuum,
so you've got to take everything along
with you,
and had to have a sealed pressurized can with air
or some type of oxygen supply.
Laika was actually selected, they only mentioned three dogs there.
She was actually selected for six candidates due to
her even temperament.
The other thing we learned is that we've got to bring anything that we
need along with us.
It's not there in space.
Third thing, they noted this in the video.
Sensors fail at
extreme temperatures.
And we'll study this during the vacuum environment
because we know
that the three effective or the three
main ways of transferring heat are conduction, convection, and
radiation. And radiation really only happens
at...
Is really the only useful way of dissipating heat in
space. So you can be subjected to extreme
temperatures.
I will put that as a fourth. Extreme temperatures
can vary from
plus and minus 200 C, depending on whether you're in the eclipse
or in the sunlight. The cabin temperature
was 109 degrees Fahrenheit, I don't know why they reported it in
Fahrenheit, by the third
orbit.
We also learned about the Van Allen radiation belts and the
radiation environment, because those sensors
fortunately did work.
The United States and Australia had read high radiation
levels prior to that, but did not release that data to the Soviets
at the time.
Later, the US satellite Explorer 1 in January of
'58 confirmed that, and then again, we
learned the lesson about drag. It eventually de-orbited,
and these are some of the topics we will be discovering more about in
this course.
Pillars of Creation. I wanted
to talk about this a little bit because on the right here
is the James Webb telescope's image.
The one on the left is the Hubble Space telescope's image.
You can see how much the technology has
improved over the years. So I thought this quote by
Ray Bradbury was pretty fitting. He was a
science fiction writer who wrote "The Martian Chronicles" and "Fahrenheit"
and speculated about asteroids, moon craters,
Mars orbit.
And in the 1950s, he
hypothesized that three
geostationary satellites could provide, this
is obviously not to scale, could provide
full Earth
coverage.
Like that. And that was
years before we
in the military started catching
up on
a lot of those concepts.
Some more quotes here. "Space is a harsh
place,"
is the bottom line for this.
And then a couple of quotes from Dr.
Robert Zubrin, who wrote "The Case for Mars", "The Case for Space", "The
Case for Nukes", "Energy Victory", "The New World
on Mars", as well as many other books.
He often comes and speaks at UCCS.
And Elon Musk, the quote there, who is our
newest trillionaire, apparently.
These are our course objectives.
We're going to study solar space weather
phenomena.
Mainly talk about the six areas of the space environment
of interest, which include bioastronautics, vacuum,
plasma radiation,
and
orbital debris.
The course readings will be provided.
No textbook is required, although two textbooks that I do
use regularly are by Tribble, "The Space Environment",
and Pizziconi, "The Space Environment and its Effects on
Space Systems." But I will provide readings for you.
Syllabus is posted. Please ask for help if you're stuck on a
homework or anything like that. Come to my office hours.
References will be in AIAA
format.
Whoops, that was a typo there.
AIAA format, American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics. If you're not a member, I encourage you to look into that.
I have provided the format
in your syllabus on
a good reference for that type of referencing.
Main thing is be consistent, and note
it's very similar to APA, but not exactly the same.
Homework is due by 11:59 on the due date.
Late homework will be penalized
10% per day, not per workday, but per day.
There will be two exams
that will be timed, open book, open notes, and then you'll have a
project which I will introduce shortly.
You are required to give a current events presentation.
I have given you the sign-up sheet on
the
Canvas page, so make sure you sign up for that soon.
This is the course schedule. Roughly six parts, vacuum, neutral,
charged particles, and plasma, human effects, orbital debris,
and the radiation environment. Grading scheme is
this.
30% for the exams, 25% for homework,
current events five, and the final project is worth
30%. So the project overall is worth a significant
part of your grade overall, 40%.
Expectations.
Make sure you keep up with the homework, the readings,
and
the design project and homework especially.
So, the next question is, where does space begin?
Well, you get your astronaut wings at about 93 kilometers or
about 58 miles.
One definition of space is, oh, it starts at 130 kilometers.
I don't know where anyone got that.
That's about 81 miles. Another
definition is where you get your astronaut wings.
And the other question is, who is an
astronaut? Are commercial astronauts or high flyers
that have been up there since 2004 considered
astronauts? Virgin Galactic, Richard Branson,
and Blue Origin, Jeff Bezos and his brother there.
And then on the top picture is Katy Perry, Gayle King,
Lauren Sanchez, and Asa Bo,
who flew. Are they astronauts?
Well, the FAA now requires, they changed this
recently,
that
you need licensing, and you also are
limited to activities essential to public safety
or provide a contribution to human spaceflight safety.
So going up there and floating around for a few hours is not considered an
astronaut.
Where does space begin for satellites?
There's really no agreed-upon definition or strict
cutoffs, but we're going to use about
200 kilometers or about 120
miles
where an object will stay in space briefly.
This is an overview of some of the orbits.
LEO is about 200 kilometers in altitude.
If you had a peach,
the LEO orbit would be about the size of the peach fuzz.
MEO showed up in white here. I don't know why.
Is about 500 to 30,000
kilometers. That's a pretty wide range, so everything from here
out to here.
And that is where GPS is. And then GEO is about
36,600 kilometers or about
27,000 miles.
The Kármán line, incidentally, is 100 kilometers or 62 miles,
which is about one-sixth the driving distance between LA
and San Francisco.
But that is where traditional aircraft can essentially
no longer fly.
So that's a brief introduction.
GEO, incidentally, is
about three times out the diameter of the Earth, and this diagram
is obviously not to scale.
What object most strongly affects the space environment?
Well, it's not the moon as shown here.
But obviously, it's the sun, which we talked about a
few minutes ago.
What is this? This is reentry,
and it's very harsh, and the reason it's
harsh is that you have kinetic energy in
LEO
is about one-half MV squared,
where velocity is about seven kilometers per
second or 16,000 miles per hour. So you're going very
fast. Where does that kinetic energy go?
It's converted into thermal energy.
Temperatures can get up to 3,000 degrees Fahrenheit
or 1,650 degrees Celsius.
Why are we worried about the space environment?
Well, about 25% of all space anomalies are related to
interactions with the space environment.
And these are just some of the things.
We have outgassing, radiation burst, plasma charging,
surface charging, contamination, a single-event
upsets or memory anomalies, or
unpredicted drag.
The main effects in low Earth orbit, or about up
to 300 kilometers,
are
the vacuum environment, drag,
neutral particles, which can cause two things.
Mechanically, it can cause sputtering, physical
sputtering on the spacecraft, and then chemically, atomic
oxygen likes to combine with everything.
We also have significant charge particles, radiation
environment in
mega electron volts or higher, and of course, LEO is
occupied by a lot of orbital debris.
The density, we'll talk about density here, mainly
drag.
Drag can affect you less than about 1,000 kilometers.
And it is very hard to predict the density because it
varies with solar activity.
Drag
is proportional to the density. Proportional
to.
Density
velocity squared. So if you're going seven
kilometers per second, that velocity is very high and
that creates a lot of drag. And as
the drag affects it, you'll be going faster,
and I'm sure you've taken orbital mechanics by now.
As you go lower in the atmosphere, you go faster, velocity
increases, and hence drag affects you more.
It's very hard to predict our solar cycles.
For example,
in 2011, we expected the solar max
to happen in 2011. It actually didn't happen until closer
to 2014
and that was
not one of the most extreme ones on record.
That was. And Cycle 25 is already starting and
it's finishing up to be a little higher than we predicted.
What does this lead to? Well, it leads to things deorbiting.
You
may have heard about the Chinese Long March 5B rocket that
deorbited in 2021. No one was sure where it was
going to land. I think it landed somewhere in the Indian Ocean.
Anyway, it didn't harm anyone.
And then a few years ago, Elon launched a
pack of satellites and
they actually, 40 of them burned up after a
space storm increased that density
and made them deorbit. And I was just reading this morning
about another satellite system that is deorbiting,
and I'll talk about that more when we get to the neutral environment week.
The vacuum environment.
There's low pressure, so continuum fluid mechanics
don't apply.
The kinetic theory of gas will help us better understand
those effects.
And this is showing some TVAC testing, thermal
vacuum testing,
at Johnson Space Center in Houston.
And that is the part of the James Webb space
telescope
being tested in that environment.
So it helps eliminate outgassing and cold welding and some of those
other effects we'll talk about here shortly.
Operating in a vacuum
can also create problems.
It can create problems with heat transfer, solar UV
degradation, outgassing,
and cold welding, and we'll talk about each one
of those in more detail.
The vacuum environment can be harmful,
and of course, one of these is a real effect.
Let me see if I can get this to play. Summer is- Whoops ...
getting lost in a world where- There's a commercial
... feels like free people.
Let's see that again. She opens the Gemini app.
She needs a spotless, expensive-
Of
course, one of these is a real effect.
That was "Total Recall" with Arnold Schwarzenegger.
And
what can happen to humans during that is
not exactly the way they showed it in the movie.
First off, asphyxiation would get you due to the total lack of
oxygen in the blood. You'd be unconscious within two minutes.
Depressurization, the gas inside the lungs and the blood expand
rapidly, and your lungs would explode.
And swelling of the skin, the water in the tissues vaporize.
You would also freeze,
and you'd be susceptible to high radiation
But this is what happened in reality
on the right here during a vacuum test with a real
human. He lost his glove and the blueness is
caused by hypoxia,
where the body parts turn blue due to lack of oxygens.
So that is a
phenomena of hypoxia. You can also get too much
oxygen,
called hyperoxia, and that makes your
body parts swell up.
Two primary forms. There are good things, like I said, that come
out of the sun.
Heat, energy, and gravity, but it also has
these harmful effects, electromagnetic radiation.
Of course, that can be good and bad,
but the way that happens is we have nuclear
fusion of about 600 million tons of hydrogen and helium
each second. Each second produces enough
energy to power the United States for
624 million years. It also
outputs
harmful gamma rays, X-rays.
I'll just call them high energy
waves.
And it travels at the speed of light,
300,000 kilometers per second.
So it takes about eight minutes to reach the Earth.
So if there's a big radiation environment, we don't have a lot of time to
respond. Charged particles can also be harmful.
These are ions and electrons obviously, but these are
lower energy.
These would be
maybe electron volts to kilo electron volts.
And to give you an example, electron volt
at the Earth's surface
is about 0.01
electron volts.
Let me write that the way it should be
written.
So these are very harsh environments that satellites, and what we
design them here on Earth,
cannot withstand.
This is also sometimes called the solar wind,
and it causes spacecraft charging.
And spacecraft charging can be harmful.
Spacecraft charging is not something that the government does to buy a
satellite. That was a joke.
But it can cause electrostatic discharge,
which can cause
harmful arcing and things like that.
It
can take days. It can take hours to
days for those phenomena to hit the
Earth, so we have a little more time to respond.
Both happen during solar particle events.
Solar flares, which we'll talk about shortly, can extend out to Earth's
orbit, and coronal mass ejections, we'll talk about shortly
also, are a physical phenomena.
The plasma environment.
Sun outputs protons and electrons.
It's kind of like a smoothie of protons and electrons.
Plasma is in fact the most abundant material in the
universe. 99% of the universe's mass consists of
plasma.
We just happen to live on the 1% that is not.
Plasma phenomena can cause single event
updates,
or damage components through electrostatic
discharge or single event upsets. Let me define that.
Where a bit could flip from zero to one or one to zero.
Anyway, either way, that's harmful and electrostatic
discharge.
ISS solar arrays, for example, operate at
120 volts to stay beyond the threshold for an
arc. So sometimes you bias the
voltages of your components to keep them
close to the voltage expected due to the plasma
environment so that you don't get those ESDs.
Micrometeoroids and... Oh, one more thing.
And of course, we have the interaction of
the plasma with our magnetosphere, which causes
the Van Allen radiation belts.
Micrometeoroids and orbital debris.
This is just one example shown on the left.
There's much more out there.
One thing you might be interested in is called NASA
Orbital Debris Quarterly.
This will give you information on a quarterly
basis about the latest and greatest in MMOD.
This is tracked by the Joint Space Operations Center, or
JSPOC, catalog.
There are about 44,000 tons above one
centimeter in orbit.
Over 28,000 objects.
17 or 18,000 is operational, about
60%. Now, that number used to be a lot lower before
Starlink started putting up thousands and thousands of satellites.
Spent rocket bodies is about 2,000 of that,
and debris fragments
is about 9,000 of those objects.
A lot of them, some examples are upper stages.
Ed White's glove. He lost a glove in 1966.
Of course, that has hopefully de-orbited by now.
There was a tool belt lost in 2008.
A spatula, which was being used to repair
a heat shield, lost in 2006.
Suni Williams lost her camera, and of course,
Gene Roddenberry, Star Trek's creator, his ashes are up
there,
were sent up there in 1992.
These are some effects of the space debris on shuttle.
Of course, we have similar effects on the ISS, but we can't bring that
down right now.
The probability of the ISS being hit by something that could render it
inoperable is about one in 71
right now, or about 1.4% over a
10-year period. But with the proliferation of more
satellites and space debris in low-Earth orbit,
that could increase, or that is increasing
sharply.
Collision avoidance has happened around the ISS through a pizza
box. So you have the ISS.
Huge, huge ISS. They established a
keep-away box around that, and we'll talk more about that when
we get to the MMOD lesson.
Collision avoidance for the first 12 years, the
ISS had to make maneuvers about one a year.
Now it's about four to six per year.
So the situation is getting worse.
That is a famous picture of a
paint chip that hit the shuttle
windshield, and it created a huge crack, which
was just a teeny, tiny little
paint chip.
There are more debris being
created.
An illustration of a Russian satellite that was broken up
in orbit created a cloud of
debris that can last more than a century,
especially if it's higher than about 400 kilometers.
It can slowly decay, and it will take a long time to get rid of
it.
And of course, we know about some of the collision events.
The Chinese did a anti-satellite mission.
And the Russians did in, I believe it was
or 2022. So in
summary, these are some of the environmental effects
of the space environment. Notice that if you're in low-Earth orbit, you
have all of these effects, but flying higher doesn't get
you out of those either.
Because if you go into, let's just talk about geo here,
you have much higher plasma radiation
risk than you do in lower Earth orbit.
Satellite subsystems.
If you're not already familiar with those, I would suggest getting
familiar with those.
We
start with our payload requirements, obviously.
Then we design our attitude determination and control subsystem, and
guidance navigation and control.
Most of the time, that is some type of momentum control device or spinning
wheels that help keep the satellite oriented in
the proper direction.
And then it would have sensors on board, such as sun sensors, Earth
sensors, or star sensors.
Electrical power consists mostly
around Earth-orbiting satellites of solar arrays
with backup batteries when you're in the eclipse.
Propulsion subsystem, we're talking about moving things
in orbit, not how you get to orbit in this class, and
those would consist of small thrusters.
Structures and mechanisms. You have to design your satellite
to survive that harsh launch environment as
well as be able to
not break under the extreme thermal duress that
it will be receiving in orbit. Thermal control.
You can use passive or active mechanisms.
A very common one is radiators with
louvers, which are like window shades that open and close.
And you have
other passive control methods, such as paints and
coverings that you can use. And then data handling.
There are two main parts to that. That's the payload data and
the housekeeping data from the different subsystems.
And then, of course, you've got to communicate.
So you'll be going through some of the design on each of these
subsystems in your design project.
Okay. For part two.
Let me gather my notes here.
Hopefully, the first introduction was
good and adequate.
The space environment. Well, this is an overall picture of
many of the aspects of it. And
fortunately for our magnetic field, the Earth is
protected from a lot of the Sun's harmful effects.
So we'll move on to part two, which is the
Earth-Sun relationships, or
really more generally, the planet-Sun
relationships.
So let me
share part two.
Actually, I think I'll start a different video for part two.
That way, you don't have to wait through a two-hour-long video.
So let's go ahead and conclude part
one,
and we'll see you in part two.